As of 17 August 1999, Eterm is now available via anonymous CVS from
cvs.enlightenment.org.  If you don't know how to use CVS, don't use
it.  The authors, of course, don't guarantee anything whatsoever about
Eterm being functional; we guarantee even less if you get it from CVS.
We try to remember to test things before we commit them, but we make
no promises. :-)

To connect to the enlightenment CVS server, you should have the latest
version of CVS installed. If you don't have the very latest version of
CVS installed, check out How to get CVS. To connect to the CVS server
using the UNIX client you will need to set your environment variable
appropriately:

bash/ksh/sh users:
 export CVSROOT=":pserver:anonymous@cvs.enlightenment.org:/cvsroot/enlightenment"
or csh/tcsh users:
 setenv CVSROOT ":pserver:anonymous@cvs.enlightenment.org:/cvsroot/enlightenment"

At this point, you'll need to run the following command (only the
FIRST time you check out the source code should you have to run this
command):

 cvs login

You'll get back a prompt that looks something like this: 

 (Logging in to anonymous@cvs.enlightenment.org)
 CVS password:

At this point you can just hit enter. You should only have to do this
ONCE when you first check out source on a machine.  Once you've gotten
this far, the rest is just a matter of downloading, compiling, and
installing.  To check out source code for the first time, you use the
following command:

 cvs -z3 co Eterm

This will check out the latest development version of Eterm.  You can
also check out particular versions of Eterm, back as far as 0.8.9, by
using the version number as a tag (with hyphens instead of dots), like
so:

 cvs -z3 co -r Eterm-0-8-10 Eterm

Once you have checked out the source code, you can keep your source
tree up-to-date by using:

 cvs -z3 update -Pd Eterm

There are other modules in Enlightenment's CVS tree, including e,
imlib, fnlib, esound, audiofile, epplets, imlib2, eConfig, eplay,
va-anim, notgame, pesh, and efm.

After checking out or updating the source tree from CVS, you need to
build it.  The process is identical to the normal ./configure, make,
make install routing, except that you run "autogen.sh" rather than
"configure."  You pass the same options to autogen.sh as you did to
configure, like --prefix.  autogen.sh will pass these options along to
configure.  Once that is complete, simply run "make" and "make
install" as normal.
