Eterm 0.9 README
----------------

Software Requirements
---------------------
- Version 11 of the X Window System.  I believe Release 4 is the minimum
  required, but R6 is highly recommended.
- The Imlib image library.  Visit http://www.enlightenment.org/ to download it
  or for more information.
- Eterm will work with any window manager (or no window manager at all), but it
  is designed to work best with Enlightenment.  Some features (like auto mode
  and similar IPC-based functions) will not work with other window managers, and
  other WM-dependent features (like desktop selection/switching) may or may not
  work.  That's life.

Documentation
-------------
- Running "Eterm --help" will show you the command line options.
- "man Eterm"
- The online FAQ's at and man pages at http://www.eterm.org/docs/
- The Technical Reference, also at the above web site, if you want more
  technical details about Eterm.

Building Eterm
--------------

From the toplevel Eterm source tree directory:

  ./configure
  make
	
Installing Eterm
----------------

After performing the build step above, run:

  make install

It is very important that you perform the "make install" step rather than simply
copying the binary into place.  The install routine does a lot more, and Eterm
will not run properly unless you perform a proper installation.

On some systems, you may need to install Eterm setuid root in order for it
to appear in a "w" or "who" listing.  This includes Debian Linux and HP-UX.
Redhat Linux and Solaris are known to not require setuid root.  If you need
to install Eterm setuid root, here's how:

  chown root /usr/local/bin/Eterm
  chmod u+s /usr/local/bin/Eterm

If you installed into a location other than /usr/local, change the above
paths appropriately.

Standard Disclaimer
-------------------

The authors don't take any responsibility for any damage this program
may do. We are doing this in our spare time. If you don't like this
program, don't use it.

Eterm was originally based on rxvt, but has been extensively modified.  In
its current form, most parts of Eterm bear little or no resemblence to rxvt (all
the cool parts.) :-)

Troubleshooting
---------------

Eterm has its own built-in debugging system which is enabled by the --debug
option on the command line.  Use --debug 2 to start with; you can go all the
way up to level 4 debugging.  Level 5 debugging slows things down a lot and is
disabled by default.  Only serious developers should touch that one.

Eterm is also capable to using gdb, dbx, and other tools to generate a stack
trace of itself when it crashes.  This information will help developers find
the problem.  Make sure that you compiled Eterm with the "-O0 -g3" compiler
flags (for gcc, or the equivalent flags for your compiler) if you choose to
submit a stack trace.

You'll also find people on the IRC channel #E (now on the OpenProjects
IRC Network at irc.openprojects.net) who might be able to answer your
questions, but please be sure you've read all the documentation
mentioned above before asking a question there.
